Someone talking nice in
here
All right. Well, good afternoon. I guess we probably could say good evening,
really. But thank you.
And we have
15 minutes with you.
And thanks for coming in slightly earlier.
If we kick it off, if you could provide us with a brief opening statement and then
open up for questions from members,
I'd be grateful.
All right. Thank you, Mr. Chair. We're very pleased to appear
here as Team Ministry for Women.
Obviously, the chief executive is Kelly Combs,
and the rest of the team behind us who we'll bring up as and when we need to.
But we're really pleased to be able to speak to you all this evening.
I think as I've spoken in previous years, our work is very much focused
on four priority areas, and that's around the economic empowerment,
the representation in leadership, the wellbeing, and safety, with an
emphasis on really practical tools
of the women and girls in New Zealand.
Our work all sheets back to improving women's economic
empowerment. We're doing that by reducing barriers to
women's participation in the economy.
That includes rolling out the expanded
new gender pay gap calculator toolkit.
It's now covering calculations for ethnicity and
disability. We're also working with smaller businesses
on pay transparency and what the practical, again, very focused on practical,
the practical actions that they can take to reduce their own pay gap.
We are also just newly dipping our toes into
work around strengthening labor market.
So we're looking at some insights and working with some key stakeholders there,
which we'll happily talk to you about
as we go on this evening. As I've previously spoken,
I've got a big focus on leadership representation.
On wellbeing, we were working very closely with the
Ministry of Health, and in safety, where we've been
working with the Ministry of Justice and other independent stakeholders.
But look, obviously the time is yours, so I'll conclude my remarks
there. But I'd just very much like to acknowledge the ministry and all of the
team involved, as well as community groups and all of the
NGOs that we work with and alongside,
for their support and for their insights, which obviously help us to do a
much better job. So thank you.
Thank you very much, Minister. Thank you very much. And good to see you all.
First question, Carla.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Last year when we had you
to the committee, you said that we asked
whether or not your ministry would monitor the implications of the pay equity
changes moving forward, and you told the committee that, "I'm yet to decide."
So a year later, have you made a decision about that?
Are they monitoring the implications of the pay equity changes?
I think I've also said to that question that I am not
responsible for that legislation and that I'll wait for an invitation from the
minister responsible, which we've not received.
So there is no work going on to monitor the
implications of the pay equity changes?
No, but what I would say is there's also three claims now
that have been raised and are progressing.
So we'll obviously look forward to the outcomes of those.
And with that, there may come a further directive for instruction, which we
will act upon accordingly.
I just wanted to, off the back of that,
I think April 7th, I got an answer back from you, Minister, and that
was with respect to me asking whether or not you'd read this
report.
Mm-hmm.
The People's Select Committee on Pay Equity report.
At that point, so April 7th, you said you'd read the summary, but you hadn't read
the report. Have you read the report now?
I've just read the summary.
Okay, so you talked earlier about the
importance and the priority of economic benefits
and economic empowerment for women.
Mm-hmm.
There's a whole section in this report on the economic benefits of pay
equity. Is the minister aware of the economic benefits of
pay equity and the fact that her changes undermine
pay equity and economic empowerment for women?
I've just-
There is an error in the question, Carla.
You can reframe it
... They're not my changes.
We still have-
I've just outlined to the committee, I'm not the minister
responsible for the pay equity regime.
Still.
And as I illustrated in my opening remarks, we're actually doing some
insights briefings into labor force, and all of
the various components that make up that.
Because as we know, pay equity is just but
one factor that contributes towards the pay gap.
The ministry is monitoring and analyzing a range of
trends, a range of data, and insights that
contribute to women's labor market experiences and of course, therefore,
the economic outcomes.
We're undertaking our own research to understand those longer term trends over
time. We're working with a range of researchers and
other stakeholders because we want to get as
broader base as we can. Is there anything that
you'd like to add further to that, Kelly?
Thanks, Minister. Excuse me.
So, as the minister said, we're wanting to make sure that we're providing
that real
holistic picture of the different measures and impacts.
So there is all of the work underway about the
gender pay gap and the annual statistics that Stats New
Zealand produce. But we're wanting to put that in the context of other things that
they're monitoring, including underutilization,
the makeup of the labor market, and also looking at industry change
over time to understand the impact that that happens to have
has also on women's economic outcomes.
Okay. Well, just one more sup on there.
In the pre-estimates hearing questions that we sent through, we asked
What outcomes does the minister intend to achieve with the funding in this vote,
and when are they intended to be achieved?
You gave a response that said what the funding was for, which to be
honest, they seem more like outputs than outcomes, but part of
the first bullet point was improving the lives of New Zealand
women.
So can you tell me how the changes to pay
equity have improved the lives of New Zealand
women, particularly in light of the fact that you haven't monitored the impacts of
it?
Look, I can't re-emphasize enough to you as a member and to
this committee that this is not legislation that I have any
responsibility for. And with regard to
improving the lives of women and girls in New Zealand, we are taking a holistic
approach to it. We are doing what we can as an agency, a very small
agency I might add,
to influence
where we can regarding reducing the pay gap,
driving women into higher paid leadership roles,
helping to improve their safety and exposure to harm
online. Again, with a view to drive them into more higher paid
leadership roles. As I said, working with the Ministry for Health to
try and better inform women as to the health services that are
available across this country to them, so that they can reengage in the
workforce should they choose to, or should they need to.
So we're doing what we can. We're pulling the levers that we can, as
a very small agency,
to help improve the lives of women and girls across this country.
And I think we've actually to date had some really great outcomes.
If I look
as an example to our pay gap calculator, which we
launched just two years ago and then relaunched just a year ago.
New Zealand now happily has the lowest pay gap it has ever had
since records began, at 5.2%. That dropped a full
3% in the last year alone. That is something to
celebrate.
And alongside that-
So do you think women are celebrating their pay?
I'm talking about the pay gap.
I-
Something to celebrate
... it's not for me to comment on whether or not women celebrate their pay.
I think that's a mischievous question.
I've a supplementary on this actually, Minister.
Because the pay gap calculator you told us last year was the first time ever
this has been done in New Zealand. It's been done under your leadership,
and Kelly your team as well clearly.
But
what data is this showing,
and what
transparency is this providing in the labor market that hasn't been there before?
You might want to talk to that a little, Kelly, but what I can say is we've
traversed the country. We've run nationwide
workshops. We've interfaced with about 300 different
businesses as well as dozens that have been involved with the
design of, and the reiteration of.
We've had about 80,000 hits to our website.
But the whole premise behind it is we're not into
mandating and we're not into regulating businesses in New
Zealand to be reporting their pay gap.
We're really, really pleased
at the organic uptake that we've seen.
That we've actually seen businesses take this seriously, that they're
leaning into it. They're wanting to utilize it.
We want to encourage workforces where they can
to seek out employers that measure their pay gap and that
publish their pay gap. And again, I just keep
harking back to the fact that we are looking for
practical tools that we can provide employers and employees
around the country so that they can address those gaps.
Did you want to add anything on insights?
No.
Yeah. So
one thing that we've been doing as part of this program of work, and the minister's
had a key role here, is going around the country talking about the work.
We've primarily been invited by Chambers of Commerce to do that.
We've had 10 to date. We've got another one coming up next month in Upper Hutt,
and that gives us an opportunity to reach a whole range of businesses.
We've also worked with Strategic Pay to run
a survey to get a smaller intel and insights
into businesses. What they see as the barrier, what's working for them,
what they're finding challenging.
And we've just run another kind of snapshot of
that research. But the first
research, how we use that and the insights we gained from that
prompted us to develop resources specifically for small
businesses. So we were able to understand more about what small
businesses need to be able to do this, to calculate their pay gap,
understand it, and take action. We also heard that young women
wanted more resources and support so that they could speak about pay
confidently in the workplace, which also is another kind of lever
that can be used to get better economic outcomes for women.
So that's been quite influential in shaping how we're thinking about our
implementation. We've also,
in the last day, received some research undertaken by another
group, and what that's shown to us is that a number of businesses out there,
they know about the calculator, and they're using it.
So we're really wanting to drive off that.
And that will help step us into
having more conversations about getting transparency over where
organizations are at. So we already encourage them, businesses
to share their pay gap,
be it on their website or their annual report, or share it with their people.
But we're wanting to have more conversations about
what would work for you, because a number of organizations actually want to
benchmark against their peers. So that's sort of the next phase of
our work, is how to get enhanced transparency there over
the information, and also action plans so that organizations can
learn from each other about what's working and not working
across different industries
Thank you very much. I've got five people wanting questions in about
five minutes, but here we go.
Okay. Thank you so much.
Thank you for being here. In your time as minister, there's
been a consistent underspend of your small ministry,
and it's estimated that it's going to be around
19.3% for the '25, '26.
Yet all of your targets, which there's five of, are being met.
So my first question is around whether the
targets,
you think that they're actually
doing what they should be doing or should they be changed.
We've had lots of targets changed in this year's vote for different
ministries. And if any of those targets are focusing
on the UN CEDAW
areas, particularly around advocacy for things like
endometriosis diagnoses, food in schools program,
pay equity, and the disproportionate pay equity of Pacific,
Maori, and disabled, and trans women in
Aotearoa.
Okay.
Thank you.
Thank you for that question.
So we have built out our targets over the
last year or so. So I think from memory, we've got some new targets, and
part of that was feedback that we wanted or that people wanted
targets in there around the Mana Wāhine Kaupapa inquiry, so we've
built those in. I think now we have seven kind of
formal targets that we report on in our annual report.
We've also had additional targets.
So for example, the minister set us another target for
this financial year, which we met, which was around growing the number of women
on our Board Connector database. So that was, I think, a
20% lift that the minister set for us there.
I think
for us, we've been having ongoing conversations with the Office of the
Auditor-General because we do want our targets to get to the
outcomes in the heart of the matters that we're here
to deliver on. So there's a lot of appetite on our side for
that. And it's sort of been how you frame them to get
there. We've got some ongoing work underway right now.
You'll be aware that all agencies are developing performance plans.
And that, again, is prompting us to think about our
performance measures. So it might be also that
as work progresses, like our work on the gender pay gap,
that we
can get more specific targets that get to the outcome of
continuing to bring that pay gap down.
So I think in answer to your question,
there's a lot of ambition and appetite on our side to have
challenging targets and not ones that are just sort of tick
box pro forma. That's not what we want.
And was the underspend from programs that were
forecast to be delivered and weren't, or were they
savings?
Yeah, we got additional
investment a couple of budgets ago, and we
have utilized some of that. We've actually been
quite stable in our expenditure over the last five years
or so.
For me, my real focus under the leadership
of the minister has been on
ensuring strong delivery and also
doing what we say we're going to do, and I think it's always that challenge
of delivering strongly on your key strategic
priorities,
and how you manage growth at the same time.
I feel comfortable that as a team and how we work as a small
ministry, we've got the skills, we've got the agility, and where we need to,
we can bring in different expertise to deliver on our
mandate.
I have to make the last question Marama Fox.
Great. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, kia ora. Kia ora koutou.
So, the
Wai 2700 Waahine kaupapa, that's not an outcome, that's an
output. I want to make that statement and I am
sure that it resonates.
So what would be an outcome from that
output would be what would be your government
response? So this is to you, Minister, your government response to the
findings. What will you do with that information?
What will you do with the findings?
And just what work is underway across
government to consider the issues raised by the inquiry?
Because that would be an outcome. And additionally,
to send money back or to have an underspend
at a time where women across the motu,
Maori women particularly, are not doing that great.
So having an underspend is crazy. But to my question,
government response to the Mana Wāhine findings. Minister, how say you?
If I had the ability to predict the future,
I would be a very happy woman. Look, I don't know yet what the
inquiry is going to find. It is extensive.
It is wide-ranging. It is going to take some time.
I've brought Kylie up here, who has been appearing
on behalf of the ministry and has been organizing it.
Would you like to talk a little bit more detail about what we've been hearing?
Yeah, so it isn't the role of the ministry to
anticipate those findings. It's a judicial process, and
at the end of 2028, there will be an opportunity for the minister to
consider those findings at that time.
I think-
Can I just suggest that there, if I may. Sorry, through the Chair.
Surely we're smart enough to recognize that some of the things are
as clear as the glasses on my face as to what's
gone on and what's going on. So I'm interested to hear from the minister-
Oh, sorry.
Marama Fox. No, I do have to call this in because
this is a judicial process.
Yeah.
You can't call what the findings of the judicial process are going to be.
So look, thank you, Minister. Thank you,
Kelly, Anna, and Kylie
very much for appearing in front of the committee this evening. Appreciate it.
Thank you.